---
title: Challenge Problems 1
author: Jackson Goerner & Ali Toosi
date: 2021-04-28 12:00:00 +1100
categories: [Challenge Problems]
tags: []
math: true
code: true
---

# Problem 1 - Sports Loans

## Statement

Andrew is head of the sports club, and manages the inventory.
Part of Andrew's job is loaning footballs to people, and collecting those footballs once they have been used.

At the start of the day, Andrew has \\(r\\) footballs in stock, and knows that \\(p+q\\) people will approach him over the course of the day. \\(p\\) people will request a football, while \\(q\\) people will return a football. What Andrew does not know is the order in which these people will approach him.

Of course, Andrew wants to be able to give a football to everyone who requests one, when they request one. So for example if the first \\(r+1\\) people want a football, Andrew can't give a football to the last person.

Andrew wants to know the probability that the above situation does **not** occur today, in other words the probability that every time someone requests a football, Andrew has one in stock.

## Input / Output

Input will consist of three space separated integers, \\(p, q\\) and \\(r\\), as defined in the problem statement.
Output should be a single number, the probability that Andrew will always be able to give a football to anyone who requests it. This number should have absolute error less than \\(10^{-8}\\).

## Solution

To handle the easy cases, if \\(p \leq r\\), then the probability is 1 (We can't possibly run out of footballs). If \\( p > r + q\\), then the probability is 0 (We can't possibly handle everyones request). We assume neither of these is the case for the following discussion.

Let's first view the problem through a different lens, to make the solution a bit more natural.
Imagine Andrew is a point on the 2D plane. Whenever a person approaches him to give him a football, he moves one unit in the positive \\(x\\)-axis, and whenever a person approaches him to request a football, he moves one unit in the positive \\(y\\)-axis. 

We can think of this as the \\(x\\)-axis representing footballs returned, while the \\(y\\) axis represents footballs taken.
Since we start with \\(r\\) footballs, it might start make sense to start Andrew at the position \\((r, 0)\\). Then, when Andrew is on the line \\(y = x\\), we know that Andrew has exactly 0 balls in inventory. Therefore we want to know the probability that Andrew never dips above this line (or equivalently, that Andrew never touches the line \\(y = x + 1\\)).

Since any ordering of the $p+q$ people is equally likely, we can simply count all possible distinct paths from \\(r, 0)\\) to \\(r+q, p\\), and the proportion of these paths which sit below the line \\(y = x+1\\) is the probability we want. The number of all possible paths is \\({p+q} \choose p\\) (or \\({p+q} \choose q\\)), since we can just pick the locations of the \\(p\\) (or \\(q\\)) people in our ordering.

Now, counting the number of paths that avoid the line is tough, but we can do something similar by finding a [bijection](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Bijection) between invalid paths and something else.

Rather than considering paths from \\((a, 0)\\) to \\(a+q, p)\\), what if we instead started from the same point, reflected on the line \\(y = x+1\\)? Then we'd be looking at paths from \\((-1, a+1)\\) to \\((a+q, p)\\). Note that every path between these two points needs to touch the line \\(y = x+1\\). Furthermore, we can turn each of these paths into an invalid path from \\((a, 0)\\) to \\((a+q, p)\\) in the following way:

1. Find the first intersection of the path with the line \\(y = x + 1\\) (Some intersection must exist).
2. Mirror the path along the line \\(y = x + 1\\) before this intersection.

Since \\((-1, a+1)\\) is the mirrored version of \\((a, 0)\\), all of these new paths are distinct paths from \\((a, 0)\\) to \\((a+q, p)\\). Furthermore, since they are only flipped before we hit the line, each of the these paths hit the line and are therefore invalid. Hopefully it's also easy to see that every possible invalid path can be reached via this mirror method.

Therefore, the total number of invalid paths is equal to the total number of *any* sort of path between \\((-1, a+1)\\) and \\((a+q, p)\\). By the same argumentation as before, there are \\({(a+q+1) + (p-a-1) \choose a+q+1} = {p+q \choose p - a - 1}\\) possible paths.

Now that we know how many paths there are in total, and how many paths are invalid, we can calculate some probabilities.
The probability that Andrew does run into this situation (That we have a bad path) is:

$$
    P(\text{bad}) = \frac{p+q \choose p - a - 1}{p+q \choose p} = \frac{(p+q)!p!q!}{(p+q)!(p-a-1)!(q+a+1)!} = \frac{\prod^a_{i=0}p-i}{\prod^a_{i=0}q+i+1}.
$$

The probability the question asks for is then just \\(P(\text{good}) = 1 - P(\text{bad})\\). Note that the cancellation above is required to fit within precision and time limits, as we can't compute \\(p!\\) for large enough \\(p\\) within time.
